RULES & SETTING PRIMER

RULES & Setting PRIMER

INSPIRATION AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Ironsworn: Starforged is built upon mechanics and creative inspiration
from many games. Here are the most direct influences.

Apocalypse World, by D. Vincent Baker and Meguey Baker

Blades in the Dark, by John Harper

City of Judas, by Davide Pignedoli

WRITING AND DESIGN

Shawn Tomkin

LEAD ILLUSTRATOR AND ART DIRECTION

Joshua Meehan

ICON AND CARD DESIGN

Nathen Græy

SAFETY TOOL

DEVELOPMENT AND CONSULTATION

Kienna Shaw Lauren Bryant-Monk

CONSULTANT FOR

DISABILITY SENSITIVITY

Mark Thompson

ADDITIONAL WRITING, EDITING, CONSULTING, AND LOGISTICS

James Kearney Matt Click Michael Barker Tim Kearney

ADDITIONAL ART

Jeff Zugale Sarah Dahlinger

DIGITAL TOOLS

Ayethin Dominic Eliot (Xeno)

Nick Boughton rsek

®

Dungeon World, by Sage LaTorra and Adam Koebel

Fate, by Rob Donoghue, Fred Hicks, Leonard Balsera, et al.

Mythic, by Tana Pigeon

Stars Without Number, by Kevin Crawford

PLAYTESTERS AND CONTRIBUTORS

Aaron Feild, Aaron Hattle, Adam Cottrell, Adam Minnie, Aden Albert,
Adriana Salguero Myers, Alex Nguyen, Alyssa Carter, Amelia Carter,
Anders Hällzon, Andrew Giffin, Andrew Huffaker, Arlan Stutler, Atlas,
Autumn Armstrong-Berg, B Kretschman, Ben Straub, Brian Ancliffe, C
Kretschman, cajovna Abarat, Caleb Johnson, Caleb P, Cassio, Claire
Mulkerin, Dale Blackburn, Danielle Fischer, David Bowditch, David J
Hall, Denis \"aBigOwl\" B., Drea Doom, Eric Christian Berg, Fiore Costa,
Foxelly, Gabriel M. Araujo, Galaga Galaxian, Gavin X. Christensen
Burgess, Geoff Kelly, GeorgeOrr, Greedo Briefs, Greg Ehrrr, guumaster,
HAJ523, Heather Schultz, Irafenix, Jackson \"Disco Noodles\" Hearing,
Jacob Munkie, Jacob Ward, JacobTheMunkie, Jake H, James A. Sral, James
Booth, Jamie Thul, Jason Corley, Jean da Silva, Jeff Armstead, Jeff
Lopez, Jeremiah Wenneker, Jim DelRosso, Joel Britton, Joshua Meehan,
Juan \"John Fight\" Lucha, Julien Chastaing, Justin Ragan, Kate Ravenna,
Kenny Crowe, Kris Hammerberg, Krzysztof Czopek, Laflys, Lebo Munjeri,
Lee Hancox, Luke B, M Khoirul Fatikhin, M. Christof Berger, Marc-André
Durocher, Mark Magree, Martin G. U. Wolf, Mason Warring, Mathew
Folwarski, Matt Risby, Max Kihlstedt, Maxthelax, Melrakki, Michael
\"Griff\" Stueven, Mikey Mike, Nikki Duarte, Offray Vladimir Luna
Cárdenas, Olivia Meehan, P0rthos, Peter Graham, PeteRPG, Phil M, Philipp
Commans, R Sekouri, Remi van Casteren, Robert Slaughter, Rodrigo Silva,
Ron Frazier, Scott Marshall, Sean Brimblecombe, Shane Black, Shaun
Attfield, Shawn

Copyright ©2022 Shawn Tomkin

For more info, or to purchase Ironsworn: Starforged, please visit
ironswornrpg.com

Medero, Sidh Vagor, Sofia Peralta, Soniú Battiato, SorenTheKirin, Steve
Morrison, Steven Lillis, Stevie Militello, Suzana, Talon G, Tavon
Gatling, Teddy Turner, Terrie Click, Tiffany Knapp, Tim Tuinstra, Tom
Kelly, Vylix, Xeno, Yuri A., Zen

CHAPTER 1

THE BASICS

14 15

In Ironsworn: Starforged (hereafter referred to as Starforged), you are
a spaceborne hero sworn to undertake perilous quests. You will explore
uncharted space, unravel the secrets of a mysterious galaxy, and build
bonds with those you meet on your travels. Most importantly, you will
swear iron vows and see them fulfilled---no matter the cost.

To play Starforged, you make some decisions about the setting and your
character, and set your story in motion. When you encounter something
dangerous or uncertain, your choices and the dice determine the outcome.

BUILDING ON THE IRONSWORN LEGACY

Starforged is a standalone sequel to the Ironsworn tabletop roleplaying
game. If you're an experienced Ironsworn player, welcome back! You'll
find some changes and enhancements to suit the spaceborne setting, but
the core of the game will be familiar. If you're new to Ironsworn, this
rulebook will give you everything you need to undertake quests in a
perilous galaxy.

MODES OF PLAY

Starforged offers three ways to play:

✴ Guided: One or more players take the role of their characters, the
protagonists in your story, while another player is the guide. The

guide is sometimes referred to as a gamemaster or GM in other
roleplaying games. Instead of playing as one of the protagonists, the
guide helps bring the world to life, portrays the people and creatures
the protagonists encounter, and works with the other players to decide
the outcome of actions and events.

✴ Cooperative (Co-op): You and one or more friends play together to
overcome challenges and complete quests. A guide is not required.

The Starforged game system will help reveal the nature of locations,
characters, and situations you encounter.

✴ Solo: As with cooperative play, no guide is necessary. You portray a
lone heroic character, using the Starforged game system to explore

the dramatic story of your character and their fateful vows.

WELCOME TO THE FORGE 17

USING THIS RULEBOOK

This primer contains the first chapter of the Starforged rulebook.
Here\'s a look at what\'s inside the complete book.

WHAT YOU NEED TO PLAY

You'll need some dice to play Starforged:

✴ Two ten-sided dice (d10) for each player. These are challenge dice.

✴ One six-sided die (d6) for each player. This is an action die.

✴ Optionally, another pair of ten-sided dice to use as oracle dice.

You'll also need some print-and-play materials (available for download
at ironswornrpg.com):

✴ One set of asset cards (also available for purchase as a preprinted
card deck).

✴ The Starforged Playkit, a set of reference sheets and worksheets.
Finally, you may want a journal or notebook to record your adventure
log.

SCHEDULING YOUR STARFORGED SESSIONS

If you're playing solo, a session can be as long as you like, from a few
minutes to a few hours. If you're playing with others, you probably want
to dedicate enough time to make some progress in your quests; plan on a
couple of hours or more.

ABOUT KEY TERMS

Throughout this book, key terms will be shown in red when they are first
introduced. If a key term is reintroduced in another important context,
it will be shown in red again.

TONE AND INSPIRATION

Starforged is human-centric science fiction on a perilous frontier. This
is a scavenged future, with equipment often cobbled together from
salvage. People cling to survival on inhospitable worlds and in remote
space stations. Much has been forgotten or lost. It's a dangerous life
for anyone living on this frontier, and doubly so for the
Ironsworn---those adventurers bound to sworn quests.

Inspiration comes from the quest-driven stories of The Mandalorian, the
lived-in aesthetic and fantasy-infused trappings of the original Star
Wars trilogy, the workaday exploits of Firefly, the isolated horror of
Alien, the mysticism and faction politics of Dune, the retro-tech and
desperation of Battlestar Galactica's modern reboot, the cosmic
mysteries and class struggles of The Expanse, and the gonzo adventures
and fantastic locations of Guardians of the Galaxy.

You can bend the tone to your liking. You'll make a unique version of
the setting as you define aspects such as its history, technology,
communities, lifeforms, supernatural abilities, and more.

18 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS WELCOME TO THE FORGE 19

THE SETTING

Your adventures are set within the Forge. This is a globular cluster in
orbit around your people's home galaxy. It is 1,700 light years above
the galactic plane---a bright island in a dark void.

Interstellar nebula span the depths of the Forge, interspersed with
denser clouds of vibrant interplanetary dust and strange energies. It is
a chaotic galaxy wracked by fiery stellar storms and unpredictable
gravitational currents. The planets and stars of this place are born of
that chaos.

Your people came to the Forge two centuries ago in the wake of a
cataclysm in their home galaxy. Today, this new home offers opportunity
and peril. Remnants of ancient civilizations hold dangerous knowledge
and forbidden power. Your people build settlements on new worlds, but
those places rarely offer a safe haven. Conflicts rage between people
and factions. Pirates prowl the spaceways in search of easy prey.
Baneful creatures and dark forces dwell on corrupted planets and in the
abyssal void between stars.

REGIONS OF THE FORGE

Your people divide the Forge broadly into four regions:

✴ Terminus: Your people landed in this region following their exodus
from their home galaxy. Settlements are common here. Factions

compete for resources, and spaceborne caravans follow charted paths
among the stars. But the Forge is a vast galaxy; even here, there are
still unknown and isolated domains.

✴ Outlands: In the last few decades, your people have pushed deeper into
the galaxy, searching for habitable planets, resources, and

opportunities. Settlements within the Outlands are scattered, and
navigation paths are often uncharted.

✴ Expanse: A few bold pioneers have delved the far-flung reaches of the
Forge. Isolated settlements have been built among these distant

domains, but they are usually lost and disconnected from the settled
regions.

✴ Void: Beyond the Forge, there are only a few isolated stars and vast
gulfs of nothing. Travel beyond the periphery of the Forge is difficult

or impossible.

20 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS

MECHANICS AND THE FICTION

Starforged is a game. It uses various mechanics, such as rolling dice
and managing the resources on your character sheet. As a player, you
often make decisions based on a desired mechanical outcome. For example,
you might choose a particular action to get a bonus on your die roll.
The basic mechanics of Starforged are introduced in this chapter.

Starforged is also heavily reliant on the fiction---the imagined
narrative of characters, places, and situations within your game. You
envision actions and events in a way that is consistent with the
dramatic, fictional reality you have forged for your story and the
setting.

HOW MECHANICS AND FICTION INTERACT

You start by picturing the situation. What is happening? What are you
trying to do? How are you doing it? If you are playing solo, imagine it.
If you are playing co-op, talk it out. If you are the guide, set the
scene for your players and work with them to add or clarify details.

Then, if a protagonist faces uncertainty or danger, the mechanics help
resolve the situation. You roll dice, check the result, and translate
that outcome back to the fiction. How does the situation change? What
happens next? In this way, the fiction bookends the mechanics.

You'll learn how the mechanics work in this chapter, but keep in mind
this balance between those mechanics and the fiction. Without mechanics,
your story lacks choices, consequences and surprises. Without fiction,
the game is an exercise in rolling dice. Playing Starforged relies on
both the mechanics and the fiction, but leads and follows with the
fiction.

IRON VOWS

For the people of the Forge, an iron vow is sacred. When you hold a
piece of iron and declare your solemn promise to serve or aid someone,
or to complete a personal quest, your honor is bound to that vow. Those
who undertake these sworn quests are called Ironsworn. Abandoning or
recanting an iron vow is the worst sort of failure.

Iron vows are the core of playing Starforged. It is your vows that drive
you. These goals create the context for your adventures and challenges.
As you complete vows, you gain experience and new abilities.

In the campaign launch exercises in the next chapter, you'll have an
opportunity to define the nature of iron vows in your setting.

22 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS WELCOME TO THE FORGE 23

YOUR CHARACTER

You use a character sheet (shown on the opposite page, and available as
part of the Starforged Playkit) to manage the main aspects of your
character. This sheet includes components such as a momentum meter,
condition meters, and impacts. We'll cover these later in this chapter.

The character sheet also includes your stats. These are core to your
character's capabilities, nature, and approach. In the next chapter,
you'll create your character and assign each stat a value from 1 to 3.
Then, when things get risky or uncertain, you roll dice and use one of
your stats as a bonus.

The stats are:

✴ Edge: quickness, agility, and prowess when fighting at a distance.

✴ Heart: courage, willpower, empathy, sociability, and loyalty.

✴ Iron: physical strength, endurance, aggressiveness, and prowess when
fighting at close quarters.

✴ Shadow: sneakiness, deceptiveness, and cunning.

✴ Wits: expertise, knowledge, and observation.

Another key aspect of your character is your assets, an example of which
is shown below. They are formatted as poker-sized cards. Assets provide
abilities that can improve or modify your actions. They are acquired
when you create your character and as you gain experience. In this
rulebook, asset names are shown in ALL CAPS. You can learn more about
assets on page 54.

YOU ARE IRONSWORN

Your character is not just an array of mechanical bits and bobs. They
are a person, grounded in the fiction of your setting. They have hopes
and fears, virtues and failings. In the exercises in the next chapter,
you'll create your character and define their nature and background. For
now, here are some default assumptions:

✴ You are driven: Many live out their lives barely venturing beyond the
shelter of their orbital station or planetside outpost, but you are

different. Your sworn vows lead to a life of danger, heroism, and
sacrifice at the edge of known space---and beyond.

✴ You are a spacer: For most, space is lonely, cold, incomprehensibly
vast, and full of peril. For you---at least for now---it is home. You
have

a starship, and the depths of this largely uncharted galaxy call to you.

✴ You are competent: You might specialize in a particular career or set
of skills, but you are broadly self-reliant and capable.

✴ You are imperfect: You are not without your limitations. You'll make
bad decisions. You will fail. Fate will conspire against you.

Overcoming those hardships, pushing on, is what makes you heroic.

✴ You are unbound: The default setting is human-centric, and

Starforged does not include specific options to play aliens, robots,

or other non-human science fiction archetypes. Aside from that
consideration, envision your character as you like. There are no
gameplay or setting restrictions that constrain your character's race,
culture, disabilities, sexual orientation, or gender identity.

OTHER CHARACTERS

The mechanics and fiction of Starforged are almost entirely focused on
the actions and intent of your character. But you are not alone in the
Forge; there are other characters who will take a role in your story.

✴ If you are playing a co-op or guided game with other players, their
characters are referred to in these rules as your allies.

✴ A companion is a special type of asset. They are a person, creature,
or robotic helper who accompanies you on your adventures.

✴ NPCs (non-player characters and creatures) are the other characters
who inhabit your universe. They can have a single mechanical attribute,
their rank, to help set their relative scale and abilities. But you do
not

roll dice for them. When you attempt to influence them, oppose them, or
aid them, take action from your character's perspective.

✴ As you explore the Forge and undertake quests, you establish deeper
relationships with NPCs---called connections---who become a more

vital part of your campaign.

26 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS

Moves are self-contained systems to resolve an action, scene, or
question. There are moves to cover most uncertain or risky situations
you encounter in Starforged. Moves are centered on the players and
protagonists. Other characters do not make moves.

MOVES AND DICE

Most moves are based on risky actions from the perspective of your
character. You duck behind cover in a gunfight, fly your starship
through a dense asteroid field, or give medical care to an ally. These
moves use dice to determine the outcome. This is called an action roll
(page 32).

A few moves measure your headway against an extended challenge, such as
an expedition or fight, using a progress track (page 39). These are

This is the move's trigger. Triggers are phrased as "when you
\[blank\]." When you do that thing, or encounter that situation, make
the move.

This is the move's name.

Moves requiring an action roll (page 32) will tell you what stat to

add to your roll, and may give you an option to include other bonuses.

called progress moves. When you are ready to resolve a challenge, you
make a progress roll.

Other moves utilize a different kind of dice roll, called an oracle roll
(page 60). These moves help determine the outcome of uncertain events
out of your character's control.

Some moves don't require a roll. They might complement or reference a
separate move, help you manage your character and their challenges, or
support you in managing a session. Don't roll dice unless a move tells
you to.

We'll cover all the basic dice rolling mechanics starting on page 32.

REFERENCING MOVES

Starforged moves are based on the structure created by D. Vincent Baker
and Meguey Baker in their Apocalypse World roleplaying game. If you're
familiar with Apocalypse World, or other games using that framework
(called Powered by the Apocalypse), you might be surprised by the
relatively large number of moves in Starforged.

Don't be intimidated. You are not expected to memorize Starforged moves.
After playing the game for a bit, you'll start to become familiar with
their organization and triggers. They are categorized by activities,
which means you tend to focus on a subset of moves for a particular
scene. When more than one move seems to apply, use the one most specific
to the situation.

Once you understand the basics of rolling dice and managing your
character's resources---as detailed in this chapter---the options and
outcomes within moves help create a perilous, propulsive story.

Moves with an action roll include three levels of possible results: a
strong hit, a weak hit, and a miss.

When a move's name is referenced within these rules or by another move,
you'll see it as underlined text. If you are reading the Starforged
rulebook on a digital device, clicking underlined text will take you to
the full summary for that move.

28 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS MAKING MOVES 29

MAKING GROUP MOVES

When you are adventuring with allies---protagonists portrayed by other
players---one of you often makes moves to resolve a challenge for the
group. This represents that character taking the lead in a particular
scene.

BEST PRACTICES FOR MOVES

NOT EVERYTHING IS A MOVE

Don't let your session jump from move to move without any roleplay,
worldbuilding, or storytelling in between. If you're doing something
safe and certain, it's not a move. If you want to gloss over something,
do it.

Many moves offer potential benefits and costs, and it's ultimately your
decision whether to risk the move to gain the reward. If you happen
across a planetside settlement in your travels and decide to roleplay
some low- key interactions with friendly locals, that's not a move.
However, if you are wounded and your ship is badly damaged, making the
Sojourn move at that settlement gives you an opportunity to recover.

MAKING MOVES MATTER

Let your moves flow organically out of your story. Don't make moves
purely for a mechanical benefit without some support in the fiction.
Don't repeat a move trying to get your desired outcome. A move, hit or
miss, should always result in a change to the current situation.

Unless a move specifically offers benefits for your allies, any
mechanical bonus you gain from a move is applied only to the character
making the move. For example, if you represent your group as you Swear
an Iron Vow and score a strong hit, you take the mechanical reward (per
the move, "take +2 momentum"). Everyone else benefits from the narrative
success. The exception are moves such as Sojourn with specific options
for your allies to take their own benefits.

When you make a move for the group, allies can contribute to your action
by making the Aid Your Ally move. If they are successful, you gain a
bonus you can leverage to improve your own chance of success. If more
than one ally makes this move, bonuses can be stacked. However, keep in
mind that moves are inherently risky, and multiple moves will
dramatically increase the chance of failure.

When you make a move for your group and face a negative outcome, you
should apply mechanical and narrative costs to an individual or the
group in a way that best fits the current situation.

However, there will be times when you make a move multiple times in
sequence. In combat, you might attack or defend with consecutive
actions. When you are traveling on a long journey, you might roll
several times to make progress on the expedition. That's fine as long as
the moves don't get too mechanical. Break up the flow of play with other
actions and narrative beats. When in doubt, follow this guideline: If
you've made the same move three times in a row, switch things up.

MANAGING NEGATIVE OUTCOMES

Moves can represent escalating danger. A failure on one move might
result in a minor complication or hardship, while leading the character
into more perilous circumstances. The outcome of additional failures can
progressively worsen to show control slipping out of the character's
grasp.

Some moves will make this explicit by giving you a specific bad outcome.
Otherwise, ratcheting up the severity of failure is a technique to
create increasing tension and danger. Whether you are playing a
character or moderating the game as the guide, this is a valuable tool
to manage the intensity of the story.

30 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS MAKING MOVES 31

The action roll is the most common test you'll make for your character.
When you make a move triggered by a risky or uncertain action, roll
these three dice at once to see what happens.

After rolling, add a stat to your action die. The move will tell you
what stat to add (phrased as "roll +stat"), or may give you a choice.
Some moves will tell you to use one of your condition meters, such as
health or supply, in place of a stat. You may also have an opportunity
to apply one or more bonuses called adds (phrased as "add +X").

The total of your action die, your stat, and any adds is your action
score. The action score is never greater than 10---anything over that is
ignored.

To determine the outcome of your move, check if the action score beats
the individual values of the challenge dice.

There are three possible outcomes for the action roll.

Strong Hit: Your action score beats the value of both challenge dice.
You succeed at what you are trying to do.

Weak Hit: Your action score beats only one of the challenge dice. You
succeed, but with a cost or lesser effect.

Miss: Your action score doesn't beat either challenge die. You fail, or
must make serious concessions.

RESOLVING THE OUTCOME

Based on your result (strong hit, weak hit, or miss), the move will tell
you how to interpret the outcome of your action. It might also offer you
a choice. The result may include mechanical changes to your character's
status and narrative changes to the current situation.

Then, envision how the overall situation has changed.

✴ A strong hit means you are in control. You are driving the narrative
and taking proactive actions. What do you do next?

✴ A weak hit means the situation is slipping out of your control.

Instead of acting, you react. How do you respond?

✴ A miss means you have lost control of the situation. You encounter
hardships, new dangers, or increasing risk. What happens next?

Remember: Your action score needs to beat---not equal---the challenge
dice to count as a hit. Ties go to the challenge dice. Since your action
score can't exceed 10, this means you never beat a 10 on a challenge
die.

PAYING THE PRICE

When you score a miss on a move, you'll usually see a prompt to Pay the
Price. This is a special move that lets you pick a likely negative
outcome, roll on a table to see what happens, or use some other random
prompt.

If you are the guide, you can consult with the Pay the Price move and
tell the player the price as appropriate to the situation. Or just ask
them to name their own price.

The main thing to remember when you must Pay the Price: Something
happens. The situation gets more complex, dramatic, or dangerous. This
can mean a narrative consequence that complicates things for your
character, or a combination of a narrative and mechanical cost.
Depending on the situation, the negative outcome might be framed as a
result of an error or misstep, or as an external event you had no
control over.

Be mindful of pacing. Don't drop the hammer on your character after one
bad action roll. Start with lesser consequences appropriate to the
situation, and apply escalating danger and hardships if the failures
stack up.

32 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS THE ACTION ROLL 33

ROLLING MATCHES

When you make an action roll, check the value of the challenge dice. If
they are the same, you've rolled a match.

Some moves and assets offer specific outcomes for rolling a match. For
example, if you Explore a Waypoint and roll a strong hit with a match,
you can Make a Discovery as your character happens upon something
wondrous. The match makes the outcome of your action more dramatic.

MOMENTUM

Momentum is a special mechanic that is central to playing Starforged.
Your momentum value ranges from a -6 to +10 and represents your inertia,
luck, and confidence. Move results and asset abilities may prompt you to
increase or decrease momentum.

NAME

PRONOUNS

CALLSIGN

MOMENTUM

+10

Mechanically, high momentum gives you a chance H

If your move and assets don't provide a specific result for a match, you
can still use it as a prompt to make something interesting happen. In
solo and co-op modes, a match is your trigger to add a twist, create a
new complication, introduce a new peril, or otherwise mix things up. If
you're playing as the guide, a match on the challenge dice can be your
cue to introduce a surprising turn of events for the players.

You can let the outcome of an action influence the nature of a match.

Strong hit: The match should represent a twist in the narrative,
something interesting, or a new opportunity.

Miss: The match should represent a heightened negative outcome, a
complication, or new peril. Things get worse in an unexpected way.

You can also let the intensity of the success or failure frame how you
interpret a match. Rolling matched 10's on your challenge dice should
prompt you to introduce a harrowing turn of events or a dire failure.
It's as bad as things get.

to overcome the whims of fate and improve your result on an action roll.
In the fiction, momentum helps portray whether your character is surging
forward, or if the tide has turned against you.

The momentum meter is on the left side of your character sheet. You can
use a paper clip or token to mark the current value.

GAINING MOMENTUM

You can gain momentum as an outcome or option when making moves. This
represents securing advantages, acquiring new insight, and making
progress in your quests. If a move tells you to add momentum---phrased
as "take +X momentum"--- increase your momentum meter by that amount.
The choices you make in a move, or the assets you use to support the
move, may modify the value of the momentum gain.

In general, taking +1 momentum represents a minor advantage. Taking +2
momentum (or more) represents a major advantage.

LOSING MOMENTUM

When you suffer a cost that causes a delay or puts you at a
disadvantage, make the Lose Momentum move. Using this move, as
appropriate to the

+9

QUESTS

+8

+7

BONDS

+6

+5

DISCOVERIES

+4

+3

+2

+1

0

-1

-2 WOUNDED

SHAKEN

-3 UNPREPARED

OTHER IMPACTS

-4

MAX MOMENTU

THE GUIDE AND THE DICE

If you are playing as the guide, you focus on moderating the session and
responding to your player's questions and actions. Since NPCs don't make
moves, you won't need to make action rolls. However, you might want to
have a pair of D10s available for oracle rolls.

severity of the situation, reduce your momentum by -1, -2, or -3.

Some moves or assets will prompt you to Lose Momentum as part of an
outcome for an action, and may specify an amount of momentum to suffer,
phrased as "Lose Momentum (-X)." You might also choose to Lose Momentum
as a cost when you Pay the Price.

-5

-6

MAX

RESET

34 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS MOMENTUM 35

EDGE H

BURNING MOMENTUM

RESETTING MOMENTUM

After you burn momentum, you must immediately adjust your momentum meter
to your momentum reset value.

The default reset is +2. This value is reduced when you suffer from an
impact (page 50). Impacts are statuses such as wounded or traumatized.
Certain moves will prompt you to mark an impact on your character sheet.

✴ If you have one impact marked, your momentum reset is +1.

✴ If you have more than one impact marked, your momentum reset is 0.

There is a box below the momentum meter to record your current momentum
reset. This may rise and fall through the course of a single session,
but some impacts are lasting and will permanently alter your reset
value.

After you reset your momentum, resolve the move. If the move or an asset
provides a

+9

QUESTS

+8

+7

BONDS

+6

+5

DISCOVERIES

+4

+3

+2

+1

0

-1

-2 WOUNDED

SHAKEN

-3 UNPREPARED

Burning momentum is a powerful option to build on your success and

momentum bonus as a reward for the move

OTHER IMPACTS

-4

deliver a decisive result or avoid dire failure. When you have positive

outcome (phrased as "take +X momentum"),

MAX MOMENTU

momentum, after you make an action roll, you may replace your action

adjust the meter appropriately.

MOMENTUM RESE

score with your current momentum value to improve your result.

For example, your momentum meter is at +7 and your action score is 4.
You roll a 5 and an 9 on your challenge dice. This would normally be a
miss, but you can burn momentum to make your action score 7 instead of

4\. This shifts your result from a miss to a weak hit.

You Face Danger to hack a locked door, score a miss, and burn momentum
to improve the result to a strong hit. Your momentum reset is +2, so you
adjust your momentum meter to that value. Then, you resolve the outcome
of the move. Since a strong hit on Face Danger prompts you to "take +1
momentum", you raise your momentum meter from +2 to +3.

-6

MAX

+10

RESET

+2

Burning momentum is never required. Even if you score a miss on a move
and have enough momentum to beat the challenge dice, you can choose to
suffer the failure and save your momentum for a more crucial moment.

After you burn momentum, you must reset your momentum. See the next page
for how that works.

MAX MOMENTUM

Your max momentum starts at +10. This maximum is reduced by 1 for each
marked impact. For example, one impact will drop your max momentum to
+9. Three impacts will reduce it to +7.

There's a spot on your character sheet below the momentum meter to
record your current max momentum value.

You can't increase momentum over your max. If you are at your max and a
move or asset gives you an option to increase your momentum, you can't
take advantage of that benefit.

36 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS MOMENTUM 37

SUFFERING NEGATIVE MOMENTUM

When your momentum is negative (less than 0), and it matches the number
rolled on your action die, you must suffer negative momentum. Your
action die is canceled for the purposes of tallying your action score.
You still check the success of your move by comparing your stat plus any
adds to the challenge dice, but you won't have your action die to help
you.

For example, your momentum is -4, and you roll a 4 on your action die.
The action die is canceled and not included in the tally for the action
score, leaving only the stat and adds.

To make matters worse, if your action die is canceled, you can't take a
bonus from an asset ability triggered by that die. For example, if an
ability is enabled by a prompt such as "If you roll a 6 on your action
die," you won't gain that benefit of the canceled die. But if an asset
forces a penalty for a specific action die value, such as stopping an
ongoing power when you roll a 1, that outcome stands. In other words,
nothing good comes of suffering negative momentum.

You only suffer negative momentum when the number on the action die
matches the negative momentum value. Otherwise, it has no effect.

MINIMUM MOMENTUM

Your momentum cannot drop lower than -6. If you must Lose Momentum, and
your momentum is already at its minimum, the Lose Momentum move will
prompt you to apply the cost in some other way. This might include
reducing a condition meter (such as health, spirit, or supply), or
suffering a setback in a quest or other challenge.

TRACKING MOMENTUM BETWEEN SESSIONS

Momentum is not reset between sessions. When you are finished playing,
record your current momentum value. When you return to Starforged, begin
play again with your momentum meter set to that value.

This also applies to the other meters on your character sheet, such as
your condition meters (page 47). You are putting your story on pause,
and will return to your character in the same state you left them---for
better or worse.

A progress track measures your headway against a goal or obstacle, and
is used to resolve whether you ultimately succeed or fail against that
challenge.

✴ When you Swear an Iron Vow, a progress track represents the challenges
you overcome on your way to achieving your goal.

✴ When you Undertake an Expedition, a progress track represents how
favorable the journey has been.

✴ When you Make a Connection, a progress track represents the evolution
of the relationship.

✴ When you Enter the Fray, a progress track represents your advantage as
you attempt to achieve your objective.

Progress tracks are drawn as a row of ten boxes that you fill in---or
mark--- as you advance toward your goal. When you initiate a challenge,
these boxes are empty.

CHALLENGE RANKS

When you create a progress track, give the challenge a rank. In
increasing order of severity, the ranks are troublesome, dangerous,
formidable, extreme, and epic.

Ranks help gauge the difficulty of a challenge. More importantly, they
are a measure of its complexity. Higher ranked challenges will require
more focus, more steps to complete, and more time---both in the imagined
world and at the table. Troublesome is used for simple challenges.
Dangerous is a typical challenge. Formidable is an intimidating
challenge. Epic and extreme challenges require great effort and luck to
overcome.

Important NPCs can be given a rank to help gauge their relative scale,
power, and abilities. If you are undertaking a quest to defeat an NPC,
facing an NPC in a fight, or establishing an NPC as a connection, their
rank is considered along with the other aspects of the situation and
goal.

When choosing a challenge rank, you should also consider how well your
character is positioned. If circumstances give you an unusual advantage
or disadvantage, nudge the rank up or down appropriately. For example,
if you Enter the Fray weaponless and facing armed foes, you would raise
the rank of your objective to reflect that disparity. If you secure the
aid of a local scout before you Undertake an Expedition, you could lower
the rank of the journey to represent their help.

38 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS PROGRESS TRACKS 39

MARKING PROGRESS

Once you initiate a progress track, you make specific moves to advance
toward that goal. These moves reward you with an opportunity to mark
progress on the progress track for that challenge. For example, as you
achieve victories on your path to fulfilling a vow, you Reach a
Milestone and mark progress.

STACKING PROGRESS

If a move prompts you to mark progress, and you have an asset ability
that also instructs you to mark progress for that action, you may mark
progress again. In other words, "mark progress" stacks. Every instance
of progress earned within the same action allows you to mark the
appropriate number of boxes or ticks per the rank of the challenge.

Similarly, you mark progress on a journey when you Undertake an
Expedition and reach a waypoint. For a connection, you mark progress as
you Develop Your Relationship. In a fight, you make moves such as Strike
or Gain Ground to mark progress against your objectives. These
incremental moves let you amass advantages to have the best chance of
success when you are ready to resolve the challenge.

Asset abilities may also offer an opportunity to mark progress on a
challenge. For example, if you are a BRAWLER and Enter the Fray
positioned in close quarters against your foe, you have the chance to
immediately mark progress on an objective in that fight.

HOW TO MARK PROGRESS

Each box in a progress track is filled with lines called ticks. A full
box consists of four ticks in a star-shaped pattern. When a move or
asset ability prompts you to mark progress, check the rank of the
challenge and fill in the appropriate number of boxes or ticks per the
illustration below. The boxes in a track are filled progressively from
left to right.

In addition, if a move or asset prompts you to "mark progress twice," do
so. For example, when you Strike and score a hit, you may mark progress
twice against your objective for that fight. Any additional instances of
"mark progress" gained through an asset ability stack on top of that
reward.

MANAGING PROGRESS TRACKS

Your character sheet includes a progress track for your background vow,
which is an epic vow you define when you create your character.

You can create and mark other progress tracks in your journal, on
notepaper, or using the worksheets available within the Starforged
Playkit. Some progress tracks---such as a combat track or low-ranked
expedition track---might only be needed to resolve a scene or two. But
most progress tracks will persist across sessions. For example, if you
have a high-ranked connection you visit infrequently, their progress
track may remain incomplete for the bulk of your campaign.

Troublesome

3 boxes

Dangerous

2 boxes

If you are playing Starforged with a digital tool, progress tracks are
likely built into the interface. Or use whatever approach works for you
to emulate boxes and ticks.

Formidable

1 box

Extreme

2 ticks

Epic

1 tick

40 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS PROGRESS TRACKS 41

PROGRESS MOVES

There are several key moves, called progress moves, which utilize
progress tracks to resolve the outcome of challenges. For example, to
see how you fare when you seize an objective in a fight, make the Take
Decisive Action progress move.

This label identifies a move as a

PROGRESS ROLLS

You don't make an action roll when making a progress move. Instead,
tally the number of fully filled progress boxes (those with four ticks).
This is your progress score. Then, roll only the challenge dice and
compare your progress score to the value of the dice. This is called a
progress roll.

Important: It's not necessary to fill your progress track before making
your progress move. When deciding whether to make a progress move, you
need to weigh the chance of success against the risk of continuing to
make preparatory moves.

progress move.

A progress move uses a progress roll instead of an action roll. See the
next page for how it works.

TAKE DECISIVE ACTION

Progress Move

When you seize an objective in a fight, envision how you take decisive
action. Then, roll the challenge dice and compare to your progress.

If you are in control, check the result as normal. If you are in a bad
spot, count a strong hit as a weak hit, and a weak hit as a miss.

On a strong hit, you prevail. Take +1 momentum. If any objectives remain
and the fight continues, you are in control.

On a weak hit, you achieve your objective, but not without cost. Roll on
the table below or choose one. If the fight continues, you are in a bad
spot.

1--40 It's worse than you thought: Make a suffer move (-2)

41--52 Victory is short-lived: A new peril or foe appears

53--64 You face collateral damage: Something is lost, damaged, or broken

65--76 Others pay the price: Someone else suffers the cost

77--88 Others won't forget: You are marked for vengeance

89--100 It gets complicated: The true nature of a foe or objective is
revealed

On a miss, you are defeated or your objective is lost. Pay the Price.

As with an action roll, if your progress score beats the challenge dice,
it's a strong hit. If you beat one of the challenge dice, it's a weak
hit. If you fail to beat either die, it's a miss. The progress move will
tell you how to resolve the challenge based on the outcome of your roll.

In the example below, compare your progress score of 5 to your challenge
dice when making the progress move. The sixth progress box is only
partially filled in, and doesn't count toward the progress score.

MOMENTUM AND PROGRESS ROLLS

Momentum is ignored when you make a progress move. You cannot burn
momentum on a progress roll, and you do not suffer negative momentum.

SHARING PROGRESS TRACKS WITH ALLIES

When you and your allies are working together to resolve a challenge---a
quest, expedition, connection, or fight---you share a progress track.
This is called a shared challenge. When a move prompts someone to mark
progress for that challenge, it is marked on your shared progress track.

When you make a progress move for a shared challenge, only one of you
rolls the dice. The result will stand for the group.

If you are successful as you make a progress move to Fulfill Your Vow,
Forge a Bond, or Finish an Expedition, anyone who was part of the shared
challenge earns the legacy reward and marks the appropriate legacy
track. See the next page for how that works.

42 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS PROGRESS TRACKS 43

Legacy tracks are a special type of progress track to show the evolution
of your character. There are three legacy tracks on your character
sheet: quests, bonds, and discoveries. When you begin play with a new
character, these tracks are empty.

As you complete quests, form bonds, and make discoveries, you advance
along these tracks by marking ticks and filling boxes. For each filled
box, you gain experience to spend on new assets or asset upgrades.

Legacy tracks are also an abstract representation of your victories, the
network of people you rely on, your understanding of the perils of the
Forge, and the funds and resources you can bring to bear. As you advance
along the tracks, envision how your character's reputation grows.

MARKING LEGACY REWARDS

In recognition of notable achievements, moves and asset abilities will
prompt you to mark ticks or fill boxes in one or more of your legacy
tracks. This is called a legacy reward. For example, if you Make a
Discovery, you earn two ticks on your discoveries legacy track.

Legacy tracks are not given a rank, but are otherwise treated the same
as a standard progress track. It takes four ticks to fill a box.

GAINING EXPERIENCE

When you fill a legacy track box, make the Earn Experience move for some
well-earned rewards. Per that move, take 2 experience for each newly
filled legacy box.

The two small experience counters attached to legacy track boxes each
represent 1 earned experience. When you fill a legacy track box and Earn
Experience, that experience is ready to spend.

SPENDING EXPERIENCE

You spend earned experience to gain or upgrade assets, including new
modules for your ship, support vehicles, companions, paths, and deeds.
These assets add new options for your character and bolster your actions
in specific circumstances.

Per the Advance move, it costs 2 experience to upgrade an existing
asset, and 3 experience to buy a new asset.

Once you spend experience, make a mark to fill in the experience
counters. Each filled counter represents 1 spent experience.

See page 54 to learn more about assets.

44 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS LEGACY TRACKS 45

ROLLING AGAINST A LEGACY TRACK

If a move prompts you to make a test against a legacy track, treat it as
a standard progress roll (page 43). Tally the number of filled boxes on
the track for your progress score, roll your challenge dice, and compare
the progress score to the challenge dice. As with a progress roll,
momentum is ignored.

CLEARING A LEGACY TRACK

When you fill all ten boxes on a legacy track, you are not necessarily
at the end of that path for your character.

As noted in the Earn Experience move, if your life of adventure and
peril continues after filling a legacy track, you may erase all filled
boxes and experience counters, and resume marking legacy rewards in the
now-empty track.

When you clear the track, mark the "10" bubble in the top right corner.
This is your reminder to treat the value of the track as 10 if you make
a progress roll against it.

EARNING EXPERIENCE ON A CLEARED TRACK

Because a cleared legacy track represents a character nearing the height
of their potential, you gain experience at a slower rate on that track.
Take 1 experience for each filled legacy track box instead of 2.

CONTINUING A LEGACY

When your character's time as Ironsworn is done---whether through
retirement or more dire circumstances---you may pass on your legacy to a
new character using the Continue a Legacy move. Through this move, you
roll against each of the legacy tracks to see how your achievements and
struggles echo through time.

Along the right side of your character sheet are three condition meters:
health, spirit, and supply. These measure your character's readiness and
status. As with the momentum meter, you can use a paperclip or token to
mark the current values.

These meters may rise and fall throughout a typical session. Their
values are reduced when you face hardship through a suffer move (page
198), and increased when you make recover moves (page 208).

HEALTH

Health represents your current physical condition and stamina, ranked
from 0 to 5. Health is reduced when you Endure Harm, and increased when
you rest or receive care through moves such as Heal.

If you are at 0 health, scoring a miss when you Endure Harm puts you at
risk of suffering an impact (page 50) or dying.

SPIRIT

Spirit is your current morale and mental state, ranked from 0 to 5.
Spirit is reduced when you Endure Stress. It is increased when you find
comfort in companionship or relaxed moments through moves such as
Hearten.

If you are at 0 spirit, scoring a miss when you Endure Stress puts you
at risk of suffering an impact or falling into desolation.

46 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS CONDITION METERS 47

SUPPLY

Supply represents your preparedness, including food, water, fuel,
weapons, ammo, equipment, cargo, money, and general upkeep.

Supply is ranked from 0 to 5. It is decreased when you make the
Sacrifice Resources move, and is increased when you Resupply to fortify
your provisions and readiness.

If you need to know if you have a specific item or resource at hand,
make the Check Your Gear move. When you Sacrifice Resources and your
supply falls to 0, you must mark unprepared (page 50).

SUPPLY AND ALLIES

If you are playing with others, the supply meter represents the shared
resources among your party. You and your allies use the same supply
value while you travel together. If any of you make a move to increase
supply, or suffer the result of an outcome that forces you to Sacrifice
Resources, each of you adjust your supply meter accordingly. If anyone
must mark unprepared, everyone marks unprepared.

ASSET CONDITION METERS

Several assets have their own condition meters.

✴ Your STARSHIP and other vehicles have an integrity meter (seen here at
the

bottom of this asset card) to measure their condition. When your vehicle
faces a damaging situation, make the Withstand Damage move. To get a
vehicle back up to speed, make the Repair move.

✴ Companion assets have a health meter that is

reduced when you make the Companion Takes a Hit move. Their health is
increased through the Heal move when you treat them or obtain
treatment---or using the Repair move for mechanical companions.

✴ Some assets have a unique condition meter for a specialized resource.
For example, if you are a FIREBRAND, you have a fire

meter and tap into that inner source to unleash destructive energies.

To track the value of a condition meter on an asset card, make a mark,
or use a paperclip or token. You can also set a six-sided die on top of
the card and rotate it to show the current value. The value of a meter
cannot exceed the maximum shown on the card.

Learn more about assets starting on page 54.

ACTION ROLLS AND CONDITION METERS

Some moves prompt you to make an action roll using the value of a
condition meter instead of a stat. For example, when you Check Your
Gear, the move tells you to "roll +supply." When you see an action
framed as "roll +\[condition meter\]," use the value of that meter in
your action roll as if it were a stat.

Some assets allow you to use the value of a condition meter as an add
for your action roll, phrased as "add +\[condition meter\]." This is a
boost to your action score in addition to your stat, rather than a
replacement for the stat.

To learn more about game terms, see the glossary on page 388.

48 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS CONDITION METERS 49

As you suffer hardships and setbacks in your quests, you may need to
mark impacts. These represent temporary, long-term, and permanent
disadvantages. Moves will tell you when to mark an impact, or may give
you a choice. Some impacts can be cleared by taking the time to recover.
Others will forever become a part of your character.

There are several categories of impacts: misfortunes, vehicle troubles,
burdens, and lasting effects.

Impacts have a mechanical effect by reducing your max momentum. Each
marked impact reduces your max momentum (normally 10) by 1. For example,
if you have three marked impacts, your max momentum is 7.

Impacts also reduce your momentum reset.

✴ If you have one marked impact, your momentum reset is +1 (instead of
+2).

✴ If you have more than one marked impact, your momentum reset is 0
(instead of +2).

MISFORTUNES

✴ Wounded may be marked when you are at 0 health and fail to Endure
Harm. You are severely injured.

✴ Shaken may be marked when you are at 0 spirit and fail to Endure
Stress. You are despairing or distraught.

✴ Unprepared is marked when you Sacrifice Resources and are reduced to 0
supply. You are not properly equipped for the dangers of

the Forge. Because you and your allies share the same supply value, you
mark unprepared together.

As with all impacts, misfortunes affect your max momentum and momentum
reset. In addition, if you are wounded, shaken, or unprepared, you
cannot increase the associated condition meter.

✴ If you are wounded, you cannot increase health.

✴ If you are shaken, you cannot increase spirit.

✴ If you are unprepared, you cannot increase supply.

If a move gives you an opportunity to raise your health, spirit, or
supply while the associated misfortune is marked, you can't take that
option. You must clear the impact before improving the related condition
meter.

Wounded, shaken, and unprepared can be cleared when you succeed on an
appropriate recover move. For example, scoring a hit on the Heal move
can clear the wounded impact. Once you clear the misfortune, you restore
your max momentum and momentum reset, and you can once again increase
the associated meter through moves.

VEHICLE TROUBLES

✴ Battered may be marked when your vehicle is at 0 integrity and you
fail to Withstand Damage. The vehicle is barely holding together.

✴ Cursed may be marked when your command vehicle (STARSHIP asset) is at
0 integrity and you fail to Withstand Damage. This is a

permanent impact. Your ship will never be quite right again.

Vehicle troubles are linked to a specific vehicle, either your command
vehicle asset or a support vehicle asset. These impacts are only a
factor when you are piloting or aboard that vehicle. Otherwise, they do
not count as an impact and do not affect your maximum momentum and
momentum reset.

Battered can be overcome when you successfully Repair that vehicle and
clear the trouble. Until you do so, you cannot raise the vehicle's
integrity. Cursed is a permanent impact and will forever plague your
STARSHIP.

To learn more about vehicle assets, see page 54. To learn more about
vehicles in general in your Starforged campaign, see page 65.

50 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS IMPACTS 51

BURDENS

✴ Doomed is marked when you Face Death and return from death's door with
a soul-bound quest.

✴ Tormented is marked when you Face Desolation, gain visions of a
distressing future, and undertake a quest to prevent that dire fate.

✴ Indebted is marked when you Overcome Destruction. To replace what was
lost and repay the debt, you will take on a duty-bound quest.

Burdens are a result of life-changing experiences that leave you bound
to new vows. Clearing a burden can only be accomplished by resolving the
quest.

While you are doomed, tormented, or indebted, you should envision the
physical and emotional manifestations of these impacts. You have seen
what lies beyond death, suffered visions of your greatest fears, or
barely escaped the destruction of your prized starship. How do these
events change you? What will you do to set things right?

LASTING EFFECTS

✴ Permanently harmed may be marked when you are at 0 health and fail to
Endure Harm. You have suffered a wound that you must reckon

with, such as the loss of an eye or hand. Or you bear physical scars
that are a constant reminder of a harrowing incident.

✴ Traumatized may be marked when you are at 0 spirit and fail to Endure
Stress. Your experiences have left you emotionally or

mentally scarred.

Lasting effects are permanent. They forever impact your character
through the momentum adjustment and---more importantly---the narrative
impact of being permanently harmed or traumatized. You should factor
this impact into how you perform moves and how you interact with the
world.

Envision the nature of the lasting effect. You may have physical,
emotional, or mental factors you must take into account. Your outlook
may change. Your goals and methods may change. How others behave toward
you may change.

MARKING IMPACTS

To mark an impact on your character sheet, fill in the appropriate
bubble. Once an impact is marked, it cannot be marked again unless it is
cleared. If a move gives you a chance to choose an impact in place of a
harsher outcome, you cannot take that option if it is already marked.

TRACKING VEHICLE IMPACTS

Battered or cursed might apply to multiple vehicles, but are only
relevant when you are aboard a vehicle with an impact (including a
support vehicle managed by an ally).

If a vehicle is battered or cursed, mark that impact on the asset card.
When you go aboard, mark it on your character sheet under vehicle
troubles as a reminder.

ADJUSTING MOMENTUM

Once you mark an impact, adjust your max momentum and momentum reset as
detailed on page 37.

✴ If you have one impact marked, your momentum reset is +1.

✴ If you have more than one impact marked, your momentum reset is 0.

OTHER IMPACTS

Certain assets offer abilities at the cost of counting as an impact for
your character. For example, the OATHBREAKER asset strengthens your
resolve as you pursue a quest of redemption, but counts as an impact
until you fulfill that vow.

You can mark these in the "Other Impacts" section of your character
sheet. They contribute as normal to your max momentum and momentum reset
penalties.

52 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS IMPACTS 53

Assets are a key component of your character. They represent your
background, skills, traits, companions, and resources. They have
abilities that give you additional options and bonuses when making a
move---or sometimes act as their own self-contained moves.

When you create your character (page 100), you select your starting
assets. As you fill boxes on your legacy tracks, you Earn Experience.
This experience is spent to gain new assets or upgrade current assets.

Starforged assets are formatted as printable or preprinted cards. Put
them alongside your character sheet for easy reference.

ASSET TYPES

There are six types of assets: command vehicle, modules, support
vehicles, paths, companions, and deeds.

COMMAND VEHICLE

The command vehicle is your interstellar STARSHIP. It is a default asset
for your character, taken when you begin your campaign. If you are
playing with others, this is a shared asset; each of you may use the
STARSHIP's abilities while aboard the craft.

This is the asset name. In this rulebook, asset names are shown in ALL
CAPS.

Assets include a default ability,

represented by the filled-in marker.

You spend experience, to acquire new abilities. When you purchase an
upgrade, fill in the marker to show you now have that ability.

This is the asset type.

The command vehicle has an integrity meter and starts at 5 integrity.
When your STARSHIP takes a hit, make the Withstand Damage move to see
what happens.

MODULES

Modules are linked to your STARSHIP and offer additional options and
advantages when aboard that vehicle.

These assets are earned and managed by a single character. They can be
shared with allies, but only if it's practical for them to make use of
it (not everyone may know how to use a RESEARCH LAB).

When you Withstand Damage and score a miss, you can

Some asset abilities apply to a variety of moves. This is usually
phrased as "when you make a move to \[blank\]." However, this
flexibility does not include progress moves. Unless an asset
specifically defines a benefit for a progress move, you cannot use an
ability when making a progress roll.

mark a module as broken to offset further danger for your STARSHIP. Flip
the card over to indicate its broken state. A broken module cannot be
used until you successfully Repair it.

54 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS ASSETS 55

SUPPORT VEHICLES

Support vehicles complement your command vehicle for planetside or
short-range operations. If you are playing with others, one of you might
serve as the pilot or owner of a support vehicle, but anyone on board
can use its abilities as appropriate to the situation.

As with the command vehicle, your support vehicles have integrity
meters. The maximum integrity varies based on the type of vehicle. When
a support vehicle faces a damaging situation or environment, you must
Withstand Damage to see how it fares.

COMPANIONS

Companions are NPC helpers. When you gain a companion, give them a name
and envision their look and personality.

Companions utilize a health meter that can be reduced if an outcome puts
them in harm's way. When your companion faces harm, make the Companion
Takes a Hit move. When their health is at 0, they are in danger of being
killed or destroyed.

PATHS

Paths are your background, interests, training, skills, powers, and key
equipment. They provide mechanical and narrative advantages, but also
reflect who you are and how you interact with the world. When you create
your character in the next chapter, you'll select at least two paths to
get started.

Some paths represent your skill with a signature weapon style or piece
of equipment. If you see a requirement at the top of the asset card,
such as "If you wield a bladed weapon...," the asset is only usable when
taking action using that item.

DEEDS

Deeds represent the notable achievement and situations of your story,
and how those events change your character.

Deeds have a requirement listed at the top of the card, phrased as "Once
you \[blank\]." You may not spend experience to acquire a deed until you
fulfill the requirement, and you cannot choose a deed when creating your
character.

56 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS ASSETS 57

ASSETS AND THE FICTION

Assets offer both mechanical and narrative advantages. For example, if
you have the HEALER path, you benefit from that asset's abilities as you
make moves to treat others, diagnose illnesses, and study biological
remains. It also provides justification to take actions other characters
would not be capable of, such as advanced treatment techniques.

But even when you aren't making moves, the HEALER path influences your
character's interests, manner, and opportunities. In a perilous galaxy
where technology has limitations and resources are scarce, how does this
valued expertise affect your relationships and the nature of your
quests? How is it reflected in your personality and ambitions?

Some assets will be more influential than others in your character
concept, but all of them contribute to how you envision your approaches
and the situations you encounter.

ACQUIRING AND UPGRADING ASSETS

When you create your character in the next chapter, you will take your
STARSHIP and choose three other assets. Then, as you successfully
overcome challenges and mark progress on your legacy tracks (page 44),
you Earn Experience. This experience is spent to purchase or upgrade
assets through the Advance move.

BUYING AN ASSET

Buying a new asset costs 3 experience. If you are playing with others,
you should avoid picking the same asset as another player---this will
help give each character their own capabilities and flavor.

UPGRADING AN ASSET

All assets include three abilities. The first will be filled in when you
purchase the asset. Upgrading an asset to claim the second or third
ability costs 2 experience each.

When you spend experience to upgrade an asset, fill in the dot on your
asset card to show you've acquired the ability. The second and third
abilities may be selected in any order.

BUILDING A STORY THROUGH ASSETS

You can Advance to spend experience when it is earned, or save it for
future use. Either way, you should look to the fiction

to give context and justification for your new abilities and resources.
Let your selection of assets flow naturally from your character's goals
and the situations you encounter, or guide your story toward an asset
you would like to purchase or upgrade.

Assets can even serve as the focus of a new vow, giving you a tangible
objective or reward for undertaking a quest. Perhaps you gain a new SNUB
FIGHTER by completing a quest in the service of a shipbuilder, or earn
membership as a sanctioned TRADER in the merchant's guild.

Envisioning how your new abilities connect to your sworn quests and
experiences gives them additional significance and context. They will be
a reminder of the paths taken and not taken, the challenges overcome,
and the bonds formed.

58 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS ASSETS 59

In Starforged, an oracle is anything that generates random results to
help determine the outcome of a move, the details of locations or
characters, or a narrative event.

In solo or co-op games, oracles help answer questions, flesh out your
setting, and introduce drama and surprises. In guided play, the guide
can use oracles for their own inspiration and answers.

Starforged includes various oracle tables to generate random results.
Some moves include their own tables. There are also a large variety of
random tables starting in Chapter 5 (page 288) that can help provide
inspiration for story events, reveal locations, generate characters and
creatures, and guide the actions of others in your world.

ROLLING ORACLE DICE

Whenever you are prompted to generate a result between 1 and 100, roll
two ten-sided dice. This is an oracle roll.

Using physical dice, there are two common methods for generating a
1--100 result. You can roll a set of D10s that includes tens digits on
the faces of one of those dice.

Or you can use two D10s of different colors, and decide before rolling
which represents the tens digit and which is the units.

Either way, you might want to use a unique set of dice for oracle rolls,
shared by everyone at the table. These dice will divine your fate and
reveal the mysteries of the galaxy, so it's worth giving them special
treatment.

ORACLE TABLES IN MOVES

Some moves may prompt you to roll on an oracle table, generating a
result between 1 and 100, to help resolve the outcome of that move. For
example, the Endure Stress table reveals your fate when you fail to
resist a mental hardship. Will you carry on or will this crisis get the
best of you?

If a move tells you to "roll or choose" on an oracle table, you decide
whether you pick the most interesting or appropriate result, or roll to
see what happens. Otherwise, you have no choice; you must cast your fate
to the stars and roll the oracle dice.

60 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS ORACLES 61

ASKING THE ORACLE

If you are playing solo or co-op, you can make the Ask the Oracle move
(shown below) to help guide your campaign and trigger ideas when you
need to know what happens next. Its most basic function is to answer a
"yes" or "no" question. Combined with your own instincts and creativity,
this move---and other random prompts---can push your story in surprising
and exciting directions.

Odds The answer is 'yes' if you roll...

Small Chance 10 or less

Unlikely 25 or less

50/50 50 or less

Likely 75 or less

Almost Certain 90 or less

Unlike other tables, a match is meaningful when rolling on the Ask the
Oracle yes/no table. If you roll a match, envision the answer as an
especially decisive yes or no, or give it a dramatic or interesting
twist.

If you are playing with a guide, they are the oracle. When you have a
question or see a prompt to Ask the Oracle, that's your cue to look to
your guide for the answer. The guide can decide the answer, or use
random tools and creative prompts for inspiration. They can even turn
the question back to you, or ask you to roll on an oracle table. But
keep in mind that---even when playing with a guide---Starforged is about
shared storytelling. Offer suggestions. Talk it out. The guide is the
final arbiter of what happens next, but everyone at the table should
participate in building the world and creating the narrative of your
campaign.

A UNIVERSE OF ORACLES

This rulebook includes an array of oracle tables in Chapter 5 (page
288). Use these oracles to answer questions about your setting, drive
the narrative, and inspire dramatic events and revelations. Some oracles
are for specific, mundane questions to streamline play ("What is the
smuggler's name?"). Others provide more abstract results that you
interpret based on the current situation ("What do I encounter here?").

Perhaps most importantly, that section includes a variety of oracles to
help you visualize locations as you explore the Forge, ranging from the
nature of a star to the details of a planetside settlement. The
Starforged universe is meant to be discovered as you play, revealing new
dangers and wonders; these oracles are your guide on that journey.

OTHER RANDOM GENERATORS

You can also use whatever oracles you prefer, including those drawn from
another game, online generators, or visual tools such as tarot cards.
Assembling your personalized toolkit of oracles will help customize the
tone and setting of the game to your preferences.

CREATING YOUR OWN ORACLES

Create your own oracle tables to better fit your preferences or
highlight unique aspects of your campaign. For example, you can create a
table for encounters within an unusual planetary environment, or a table
of random names suited to a particular faction or culture.

TRUST YOUR INSTINCTS

Random generators don't replace your own imagination and intuition. If
it's interesting, dramatic, and pushes the story forward, make it
happen. Too much reliance on random generators to answer questions about
"what happens next" can kill the momentum of your game or make it feel
disconnected and incoherent.

Keep it moving. Ask a question. If an answer leaps to mind, go with it.
If you're not sure, Ask the Oracle. Then, play.

62 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS ORACLES 63

As noted earlier, your supply meter (page 48) is an abstract
representation of your overall readiness. You are otherwise armed,
armored, and equipped as appropriate to your vision of your character.

Some assets can make specific equipment more relevant to your character.
If you are a GEARHEAD, you probably envision yourself always having a
toolkit at the ready. Combat-centric assets such as GUNNER represent
your expertise in a particular weapon or fighting style. These tools
reinforce your character's approach and skills.

Other equipment provides narrative benefit. It enables you to make moves
where that gear is important, or perhaps allows you to avoid the risky
nature of a move altogether.

Make note of equipment at whatever level of detail you like, but don't
fuss over it. During the character creation exercise you'll receive your
spacer kit (page 112), which includes fundamental gear for exploring a
perilous galaxy. If you ever need to know if you have a specific helpful
item, make the Check Your Gear move.

DEPICTING TECHNOLOGY IN THE FORGE

By default, life in the Forge is a retro-future. It is the future as
viewed through a lens of what we imagined two or three decades ago,
instead of what we can envision today. It is also a resource-scarce
future, with much of your people's knowledge and resources lost
following the cataclysm that drove you to the Forge.

That said, the technology you bring to bear---or resist---is flexible to
how you envision the nature of the setting. Is a typical gun a blaster
that fires plasma bursts, or an old-fashioned slug thrower? Are
spacecraft sleek and powerful, or are they ungainly, fragile machines
held together with fervent prayer? Your setting can suffer from class
disparity, with advanced tech under the control of the wealthy and
powerful, while everyone else is forced to make do with more primitive
resources. Meanwhile, scavengers searching the ancient places of the
Forge might unearth technologies of strange and terrible power.

The truths you define for the Forge in the next chapter help frame the
nature of equipment and tech in your campaign.

There are three types of vehicles you'll rely on as your travel through
the perilous depths of the Forge.

COMMAND VEHICLE

Your command vehicle (page 55) is your STARSHIP asset, earned at
character creation. It is an interstellar craft capable of
faster-than-light travel. If you are playing with others, you and your
allies share this asset. If you are playing in solo mode, you can fly
the ship as a lone spacer thanks to automation and centralized controls.
The command vehicle has an integrity meter, and can suffer from battered
or cursed impacts.

See pages 66--67 for a cutaway illustration of a typical STARSHIP.

SUPPORT VEHICLES

Support vehicles (page 56) are assets that represent special secondary
vehicles. They can be carried and launched by your STARSHIP. They have
an integrity meter, and can suffer from the battered impact.

INCIDENTAL VEHICLES

An incidental vehicle is one you temporarily acquire through the course
of your story. For example, if you need to journey across the surface of
an ocean world, you might borrow a sea-skimmer from a local settlement.

Incidental vehicles have an integrity meter, but cannot be marked as
battered. When you board an incidental vehicle, envision its nature and
assign a max integrity as follows.

If you or an ally aren't controlling a vehicle---you're just along for
the ride--- it's not an incidental vehicle and does not have an
integrity meter.

64 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS VEHICLES 65

Ornithor Class

Recessed gun turret

Main Reactor

Multirole STARSHIP

Crew and passenger quarters

Vehicle bay with docked shuttle

Gunner's seat

Eidolon

drive Power conduit

Eidolon field stabilizer array

Ladder to lower and upper decks

Cockpit

Cargo bay

Engine room

Aft

Sensor array

Avionics bay

Forward landing gear bay

Airlock

Medbay (multiuse compartment)

Research lab (multiuse compartment)

Extended

loading ramp

TOP VIEW

landing gear bay

Port side engine

The Ornithor Class Starship, despite having gone out of production
decades ago, is popular among independent spacers for its flexibility
and durability. Most remaining Ornithors have been refitted and
repurposed multiple times, so their configuration and internal spaces
will vary. This example can accommodate a variety of roles, including
cargo and passenger transport, exploration, and combat operations.

66 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS VEHICLES 67

The depiction of interstellar travel in Starforged is tied to the
gameplay of the exploration moves (page 168). These moves help frame
your journeys and encourage exploration and discovery.

You can ignore the setting details described below, and envision
interstellar flight as you like. However, it works best if you use a
similar approach, with faster-than-light (FTL) travel undertaken in a
series of individual segments. Think of your starship as a stone
skipping across a vast galactic pond.

EIDOLON TRAVEL

Interstellar starships that travel the Forge---including your
character's ship---are equipped with eidolon drives (commonly referred
to as e-drives). These devices harness the turbulent forces of the Forge
to propel vessels along optimal paths at FTL speeds.

DRIFTS AND PASSAGES

Drifts are the network of eidolon paths through the Forge. Spacers guide
their starships along the gravitational currents, stellar winds, and
fiery energies of the drifts like surfers on the crest of a wave.

A plotted course along drifts is called a passage. Important locations
in settled areas are usually connected by passages. But this
navigational data is a valuable resource, often greedily held by those
in power. Others must trailblaze their own paths. Beyond settled
regions, potential passages are usually uncharted and unexplored.

Even when following a passage, it's not just a matter of flying from
point A to point B. Piloting the drifts requires skilled navigation.
Spacers must be on watch for navigational hazards and lurking foes.

Worse yet, some say eidolon travel weakens the fragile bonds of reality.
Explorers tell stories of horrifying visions or visitations among the
drifts. Spacers are superstitious folk, and often employ wards and
rituals to keep eidolon "ghosts" at bay.

ANCHORAGES

An e-drive can stay powered for a few hours at most, and requires
several hours to reenergize. Thus, long voyages are made in a series of
FTL transits. Each segment of the journey ends at a waypoint---what is
called an anchorage. Since powerful gravity wells are an ideal
navigational target, anchorages are often near a large object such as a
star or planet.

Once emerging from the drifts at an anchorage, the ship slows while the
e-drive is powered back up. You can sit back and enjoy the scenery
during this layover, or go take a look at nearby locations.

DRIFTS

ANCHORAGE

PASSAGE

68 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS NAVIGATING THE FORGE 69

SEEING WHAT'S OUT THERE

When you pilot your starship on an interstellar journey through
uncharted space, make the Undertake an Expedition move to see how you
fare. Anchorages are a waypoint that helps define progress on that
journey. When you emerge from eidolon travel at an anchorage, envision
the moment as your starship decelerates to sublight speeds: The hull
rattles, warning tones beep, and sensor displays spring to life.

NEAR OBJECTS

When traveling the Forge, you can simply envision the beautiful but
mundane sites you encounter. A sky filled with the cold light of distant
suns. Clouds of stellar dust. Barren planetoids drifting in their lonely
orbits.

If you want to give a segment of your travel additional focus, Ask the
Oracle and use the random prompts in Chapter 5, starting with the Space
Sightings table (page 300). You might find a fiery star looming in your
cockpit windows, a vibrant planet, a starship carrying a fellow
traveler, or even a spaceborne creature. The Space Sightings table may
prompt you to roll twice or three times for multiple objects.

These objects are near your starship. If you want to travel to a near
object or get in a better position to observe it, your starship's main
engines will carry you there in a matter of minutes. If you find
something worthy of further exploration, you can Explore a Waypoint.
Unusual locations, such as a precursor vault or derelict, might even
warrant their own expedition.

FAR OBJECTS

If you want to look deeper into the depths of an anchorage, roll on the
Space Sightings table again to see if there is anything interesting far
from your starship. Envision yourself studying scanner data and visual
displays, peering through the Forge's stellar gases. This doesn't
require a move unless you're under pressure---it's just a routine part
of being a spacer.

If you see something interesting at far range and want to check it out,
it'll take a while. Sublight travel is ponderous. You're also diverting
power from energizing the e-drive, so all told the detour will cost
about a day. For an explorer, this might be time well spent. For a
spacer on an urgent mission, it's a needless distraction. Either way,
unless you're dealing with something risky, this doesn't trigger a move.
Point your ship in the right direction, envision the journey, and play
to see what happens when you arrive.

OUT OF RANGE OBJECTS

Anything beyond far range is out of range. Objects at this distance are
of no concern---they are too far away to cause you trouble, and it would
take too long to travel there using your main engines. Objects smaller
and dimmer than a star are probably shrouded in the stellar muck and
electromagnetic interference of the Forge anyway. Perhaps that's for the
best; some things are best left undiscovered.

OUT OF RANGE

FAR NEAR

70 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS NAVIGATING THE FORGE 71

Like most roleplaying games, you play Starforged primarily from the
perspective of your character. What are you doing? What are you trying
to achieve? What opposition and challenges do you face? Your quests, and
the characters and situations you encounter, will guide the fiction and
the choices you make.

When you have questions about what you find, how other characters in
your setting respond, or what happens next, you can go with what feels
right if you're playing solo or co-op. If you are playing in guided
mode, ask the guide. When you seek inspiration or want to put it in the
hands of fate, make the Ask the Oracle move. Use the yes/no questions
and random oracle tables to generate interesting twists, complications,
locations, and characters you might not have thought of on your own.
Above all, if it's interesting, dramatic and fits the fiction, make it
happen.

When you do something or encounter a situation covered by a move, refer
to the move. If it tells you to roll dice, do it.

A strong hit means you are in control. You are driving the narrative and
taking proactive actions. What do you do next?

A weak hit means the situation is slipping out of your control. Instead
of acting, you react. How do you respond?

A miss means you have lost control of the situation. You might need to
overcome new dangers or face increasing risk. What happens next?

If you're playing with a guide, they'll help determine how the other
characters respond and how the situation evolves. They may ask you
questions. Otherwise, you rely on your intuition and occasional oracle
rolls to drive the narrative.

This basic gameplay structure is illustrated on the next page.

72 CHAPTER 1: THE BASICS
